Only by means of forgetfulness can man ever arrive at imagining that he
possesses "truth" in that degree just indicated. If he does not mean
to content himself with truth in the shape of tautology, that is, with
empty husks, he will always obtain illusions instead of truth. What
is a word? The expression of a nerve-stimulus in sounds. But to infer
a cause outside us from the nerve-stimulus is already the result of a
wrong and unjustifiable application of the proposition of causality.
How should we dare, if truth with the genesis of language, if the point
of view of certainty with the designations had alone been decisive; how
indeed should we dare to say: the stone is hard; as if "hard" was known
to us otherwise; and not merely as an entirely subjective stimulus!
We divide things according to genders; we designate the tree as
masculine,[2] the plant as feminine:[3] what arbitrary metaphors! How
far flown beyond the canon of certainty! We speak of a "serpent";[4]
the designation fits nothing but the sinuosity, and could therefore
also appertain to the worm. What arbitrary demarcations! what one-sided
preferences given sometimes to this, sometimes to that quality of a
thing! The different languages placed side by side show that with words
truth or adequate expression matters little: for otherwise there would
not be so many languages. The "Thing-in-itself" (it is just this which
would be the pure ineffective truth) is also quite incomprehensible
to the creator of language and not worth making any great endeavour
to obtain. He designates only the relations of things to men and for
their expression he calls to his help the most daring metaphors. A
nerve-stimulus, first transformed into a percept! First metaphor! The
percept again copied into a sound! Second metaphor! And each time he
leaps completely out of one sphere right into the midst of an entirely
different one. One can imagine a man who is quite deaf and has never
had a sensation of tone and of music; just as this man will possibly
marvel at Chladni's sound figures in the sand, will discover their
cause in the vibrations of the string, and will then proclaim that
now he knows what man calls "tone"; even so does it happen to us all
with language. When we talk about trees, colours, snow and flowers,
we believe we know something about the things themselves, and yet we
only possess metaphors of the things, and these metaphors do not in the
least correspond to the original essentials. Just as the sound shows
itself as a sand-figure, in the same way the enigmatical _x_ of the
Thing-in-itself is seen first as nerve-stimulus, then as percept, and
finally as sound. At any rate the genesis of language did not therefore
proceed on logical lines, and the whole material in which and with
which the man of truth, the investigator, the philosopher works and
builds, originates, if not from Nephelococcygia, cloud-land, at any
rate not from the essence of things.

Let us especially think about the formation of ideas. Every word
becomes at once an idea not by having, as one might presume, to serve
as a reminder for the original experience happening but once and
absolutely individualised, to which experience such word owes its
origin, no, but by having simultaneously to fit innumerable, more or
less similar (which really means never equal, therefore altogether
unequal) cases. Every idea originates through equating the unequal. As
certainly as no one leaf is exactly similar to any other, so certain
is it that the idea "leaf" has been formed through an arbitrary
omission of these individual differences, through a forgetting of the
differentiating qualities, and this idea now awakens the notion that in
nature there is, besides the leaves, a something called _the_ "leaf,"
perhaps a primal form according to which all leaves were woven, drawn,
accurately measured, coloured, crinkled, painted, but by unskilled
hands, so that no copy had turned out correct and trustworthy as a
true copy of the primal form. We call a man "honest"; we ask, why has
he acted so honestly to-day? Our customary answer runs, "On account of
his honesty." _The_ Honesty! That means again: the "leaf" is the
cause of the leaves. We really and truly do not know anything at all
about an essential quality which might be called _the_ honesty, but we
do know about numerous individualised, and therefore unequal actions,
which we equate by omission of the unequal, and now designate as honest
actions; finally out of them we formulate a _qualitas occulta_ with the
name "Honesty." The disregarding of the individual and real furnishes
us with the idea, as it likewise also gives us the form; whereas nature
knows of no forms and ideas, and therefore knows no species but only
an _x,_ to us inaccessible and indefinable. For our antithesis of
individual and species is anthropomorphic too and does not come from
the essence of things, although on the other hand we do not dare to
say that it does not correspond to it; for that would be a dogmatic
assertion and as such just as undemonstrable as its contrary.

What therefore is truth? A mobile army of metaphors, metonymies,
anthropomorphisms: in short a sum of human relations which became
poetically and rhetorically intensified, metamorphosed, adorned, and
after long usage seem to a nation fixed, canonic and binding; truths
are illusions of which one has forgotten that they _are_ illusions;
worn-out metaphors which have become powerless to affect the senses;
coins which have their obverse effaced and now are no longer of account
as coins but merely as metal.