Surely every human being who is at home with such contemplations has
felt a deep distrust against any idealism of that kind, as often
as he has distinctly convinced himself of the eternal rigidity,
omni-presence, and infallibility of nature's laws: he has arrived at
the conclusion that as far as we can penetrate the heights of the
telescopic and the depths of the microscopic world, everything is quite
secure, complete, infinite, determined, and continuous. Science will
have to dig in these shafts eternally and successfully and all things
found are sure to have to harmonise and not to contradict one another.
How little does this resemble a product of fancy, for if it were one
it would necessarily betray somewhere its nature of appearance and
unreality. Against this it may be objected in the first place that if
each of us had for himself a different sensibility, if we ourselves
were only able to perceive sometimes as a bird, sometimes as a worm,
sometimes as a plant, or if one of us saw the same stimulus as red,
another as blue, if a third person even perceived it as a tone, then
nobody would talk of such an orderliness of nature, but would conceive
of her only as an extremely subjective structure. Secondly, what is,
for us in general, a law of nature? It is not known in itself but
only in its effects, that is to say in its relations to other laws
of nature, which again are known to us only as sums of relations.
Therefore all these relations refer only one to another and are
absolutely incomprehensible to us in their essence; only that which we
add: time, space, _i.e.,_ relations of sequence and numbers, are really
known to us in them. Everything wonderful, however, that we marvel
at in the laws of nature, everything that demands an explanation and
might seduce us into distrusting idealism, lies really and solely in
the mathematical rigour and inviolability of the conceptions of time
and space. These however we produce within ourselves and throw them
forth with that necessity with which the spider spins; since we are
compelled to conceive all things under these forms only, then it is no
longer wonderful that in all things we actually conceive none but these
forms: for they all must bear within themselves the laws of number,
and this very idea of number is the most marvellous in all things. All
obedience to law which impresses us so forcibly in the orbits of stars
and in chemical processes coincides at the bottom with those qualities
which we ourselves attach to those things, so that it is we who
thereby make the impression upon ourselves. Whence it clearly follows
that that artistic formation of metaphors, with which every sensation
in us begins, already presupposes those forms, and is therefore only
consummated within them; only out of the persistency of these primal
forms the possibility explains itself, how afterwards--out of the
metaphors themselves a structure of ideas, could again be compiled. For
the latter is an imitation of the relations of time, space and number
in the realm of metaphors.

[1] The German poet, Lessing, had been married for just a little over
one year to Eva König. A son was born and died the same day, and the
mother's life was despaired of. In a letter to his friend Eschenburg
the poet wrote: "... and I lost him so unwillingly, this son! For he
had so much understanding! so much understanding! Do not suppose that
the few hours of fatherhood have made me an ape of a father! I know
what I say. Was it not understanding, that they had to drag him into
the world with a pair of forceps? that he so soon suspected the evil
of this world? Was it not understanding, that he seized the first
opportunity to get away from it?..."

Eva König died a week later.--TR.

[2] In German _the tree--der Baum_--is masculine.--TR.

[3] In German _the plant--die Pflanze--_-is feminine--TR.

[4] _Cf._ the German _die Schlange_ and _schlingen,_ the English
_serpent_ from the Latin _serpere._--TR.

2

As we saw, it is _language_ which has worked originally at the
construction of ideas; in later times it is _science._ Just as the
bee works at the same time at the cells and fills them with honey,
thus science works irresistibly at that great columbarium of ideas,
the cemetery of perceptions, builds ever newer and higher storeys;
supports, purifies, renews the old cells, and endeavours above all to
fill that gigantic framework and to arrange within it the whole of the
empiric world, _i.e.,_ the anthropomorphic world. And as the man of
action binds his life to reason and its ideas, in order to avoid being
swept away and losing himself, so the seeker after truth builds his hut
close to the towering edifice of science in order to collaborate with
it and to find protection. And he needs protection. For there are awful
powers which continually press upon him, and which hold out against the
"truth" of science "truths" fashioned in quite another way, bearing
devices of the most heterogeneous character.

That impulse towards the formation of metaphors, mat fundamental
impulse of man, which we cannot reason away for one moment--for thereby
we should reason away man himself--is in truth not defeated nor even
subdued by the fact that out of its evaporated products, the ideas, a
regular and rigid new world has been built as a stronghold for it. This
impulse seeks for itself a new realm of action and another river-bed,
and finds it in _Mythos_ and more generally in _Art._ This impulse
constantly confuses the rubrics and cells of the ideas, by putting
up new figures of speech, metaphors, metonymies; it constantly shows
its passionate longing for shaping the existing world of waking man
as motley, irregular, inconsequentially incoherent, attractive, and
eternally new as the world of dreams is. For indeed, waking man _per
se_ is only clear about his being awake through the rigid and orderly
woof of ideas, and it is for this very reason that he sometimes comes
to believe that he was dreaming when that woof of ideas has for a
moment been torn by Art. Pascal is quite right, when he asserts, that
if the same dream came to us every night we should be just as much
occupied by it as by the things which we see every day; to quote his
words, "If an artisan were certain that he would dream every night
for fully twelve hours that he was a king, I believe that he would
be just as happy as a king who dreams every night for twelve hours
that he is an artisan." The wide-awake day of a people mystically
excitable, let us say of the earlier Greeks, is in fact through the
continually-working wonder, which the mythos presupposes, more akin to
the dream than to the day of the thinker sobered by science. If every
tree may at some time talk as a nymph, or a god under the disguise of
a bull, carry away virgins, if the goddess Athene herself be suddenly
seen as, with a beautiful team, she drives, accompanied by Pisistratus,
through the markets of Athens--and every honest Athenian did believe
this--at any moment, as in a dream, everything is possible; and all
nature swarms around man as if she were nothing but the masquerade
of the gods, who found it a huge joke to deceive man by assuming all
possible forms.